INTRODUCTION AND LICENSE INFORMATION

This branch currently only contains the code for the Axiom web
front-end, which was developed during the Google Summer of Code
2005. The original proposal for this project ("AxiomUI") can be found
in src/web-gui/PROPOSAL.

While this branch does not contain Axiom itself, the directory
structure is compatible with the axiom--main--1 branch, to make merging
easier. It is not necessary to have the Axiom source code to use this
software, though.

This program makes use of quite a few open source libraries and
tools. They can be found in src/lisplib and
src/web-gui/static-pages/javascript/jsMath. They come with their own
licenses and are only included for convenience and stability. No
modifications have been made to any of them.

License information for this software can be found in the individual
source files and src/web-gui/LICENSE. The former override the latter,
if they disagree.


INSTALLATION AND USE

To use this software you need recent versions of Axiom (at least 3.4)
and Clisp (at least 2.33.2, www.clisp.org). You also need noweb, which
is included in the Axiom distribution. It is also available at
http://www.eecs.harvard.edu/~nr/noweb/. To compile and actually use
it, make sure that AXIOMsys is in your PATH, go to the src/web-gui
directory and type

notangle -t8 Makefile.pamphlet > Makefile
make all

This will create a Clisp image as well as the documenation for all the
source files. Then enter

sh run-axiom-ui.sh

Start your browser and connect to http://127.0.0.1:5050/ (localhost
does NOT work currently!).

To see what is possible try the examples in src/web-gui/EXAMPLES.


TROUBLESHOOTING

If things don't work, please send a mail to axiom-developer@nongnu.org
or kai.kaminski@gmail.com or use the issue tracker at
axiom-developer.org.

Common problems:

1. Command foo doesn't work, there is no output at all!

   Currently error, compiler and autoload messages are not
   displayed. Many commands don't work yet. For example, it is
   impossible to change a plot after you have drawn it.

2. Mathematical expressions aren't rendered correctly!

   This is a problem with the jsMath package and some browser, we are
   working on this. Recent versions of Firefox give reasonable
   results.

3. Plots don't show up!

   Your browser has to support SVG. Browsers known to support SVG are
   Firefox, Safari, IE. Konqueror does not support SVG in the latest
   stable version at this time (3.4).


NOTE TO WINDOWS USERS

This software should run on Windows without major
changes. Unfortunately I don't have access to Windows systems and so I
can't provide installation instructions.
